README.md, before:

JARROW
======

Overview
--------

Jarrow is a lightweight java implementation for I/O of data stored
in formats related to [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/).
Currently, it only has support for the Arrow-related
[Feather](https://github.com/wesm/feather) format,
but it may in future grow support for the
[Arrow IPC File](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#ipc-file-format) format or other evolutions of Feather.
Or it may not.

Comparison with the Apache Java Arrow Implementation
----------------------------------------------------

Why write this when there's already a Java implementation of
Feather I/O [provided by Apache](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/java/)?
I wanted something without all those dependencies,
and for which I had full control over the data access.
I'm using it to provide Feather table I/O handlers in
[STIL](http://www.starlink.ac.uk/stil/)/[TOPCAT](http://www.starlink.ac.uk/topcat/).

This library probably does less clever stuff than the Apache one
(e.g. there is no attempt at parallel I/O),
but it's much more compact and has no external dependencies.

Building
--------

If you want the library, the best thing is just to pick up the
pre-built `jarrow.jar` file from the release.

However, if you want to build it from source, there's a makefile.
It may need editing since some targets contains references to
directories you don't have.  But basically to build the library
you just need to run javac on all the java files.

The source file is Java 1.6 compatible, and the distributed
jarrow.jar file contains Java 1.6-compatible classes.

Implementation Status
---------------------

Only feather files are currently supported.
All feather files can be read, but currently the following column types
are not fully supported on input:

   * **CATEGORY:** I haven't come across any feather files with category
     column types, and it's not clear to me how to interpret the feather
     format documentation for this type, so it's not supported.
   * **UINT64:** There's no java primitive or primitive-wrapper type that can 
     represent unsigned 64-bit integers, so it's are not supported.
   * **TIMESTAMP, DATE, TIME:** These values can be read, but the
     type-specific metadata/unit information is not currently available.

The `LARGE_UTF8` and `LARGE_BINARY` types defined in the
[Arrow](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/cpp/src/arrow/ipc/feather.fbs)
but _not_ in the
[Feather](https://github.com/wesm/feather/blob/master/cpp/src/feather/metadata.fbs)
version of the flatbuffers metadata file are supported.


Implementation notes
--------------------

The flatbuffers java source files are generated by running the flatc
compiler from [Google Flatbuffers](https://github.com/google/flatbuffers)
version 1.11.0 on the Arrow version of
[feather.fbs](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/cpp/src/arrow/ipc/feather.fbs).
I subsequently moved the generated source files into a different
java package to avoid possible namespace clashes with external code
that may use a different version of flatbuffers.


Usage
-----

Comprehensive documentation is provided in the
[javadocs](https://mbtaylor.github.io/jarrow/javadocs/).

To read a table, you can use `FeatherTable.fromFile(File)` method;
examples in `FeatherTable.main`.

To write a table, use `FeatherWriter.write(OutputStream)`;
this requires you to implement some `FeatherColumnWriter` objects
in some way appropriate to the data structures in which your table
data resides; there are examples in `FeatherWriter.main`.


Support and future development
------------------------------

I don't know whether anybody else will want to use this package.
If you do, and if you are interested in features that are not
currently present, please contact me (@mbtaylor).


Licence
-------

Available under the LGPL.  If that's not good for you I can probably
add another licence.

History
-------

* **Version 1.0 (27 Feb 2020)**: Initial release

Commit message:

prominent notice added about com.google package name change
Add a 'prominent notice' to google flatbuffers support files
indicating that their package name has been changed.
This is in accordance with the requirement in the Apache licence.

README.md, after:

JARROW
======

Overview
--------

Jarrow is a lightweight java implementation for I/O of data stored
in formats related to [Apache Arrow](https://arrow.apache.org/).
Currently, it only has support for the Arrow-related
[Feather](https://github.com/wesm/feather) format,
but it may in future grow support for the
[Arrow IPC File](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/format/Columnar.html#ipc-file-format) format or other evolutions of Feather.
Or it may not.

Comparison with the Apache Java Arrow Implementation
----------------------------------------------------

Why write this when there's already a Java implementation of
Feather I/O [provided by Apache](https://arrow.apache.org/docs/java/)?
I wanted something without all those dependencies,
and for which I had full control over the data access.
I'm using it to provide Feather table I/O handlers in
[STIL](http://www.starlink.ac.uk/stil/)/[TOPCAT](http://www.starlink.ac.uk/topcat/).

This library probably does less clever stuff than the Apache one
but it's much more compact and has no external dependencies.

Building
--------

If you want the library, the best thing is just to pick up the
pre-built `jarrow.jar` file from the release.

However, if you want to build it from source, there's a makefile.
It may need editing since some targets contains references to
directories you don't have.  But basically to build the library
you just need to run javac on all the java files.

The source file is Java 1.6 compatible, and the distributed
jarrow.jar file contains Java 1.6-compatible classes.

Implementation Status
---------------------

Only feather files are currently supported.
All feather files can be read, but currently the following column types
are not fully supported on input:

   * **CATEGORY:** I haven't come across any feather files with category
     column types, and it's not clear to me how to interpret the feather
     format documentation for this type, so it's not supported.
   * **UINT64:** There's no java primitive or primitive-wrapper type that can 
     represent unsigned 64-bit integers, so it's are not supported.
   * **TIMESTAMP, DATE, TIME:** These values can be read, but the
     type-specific metadata/unit information is not currently available.

The reading is implemented using memory mapping (MappedByteBuffers).

The `LARGE_UTF8` and `LARGE_BINARY` types defined in the
[Arrow](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/cpp/src/arrow/ipc/feather.fbs)
but _not_ in the
[Feather](https://github.com/wesm/feather/blob/master/cpp/src/feather/metadata.fbs)
version of the flatbuffers metadata file are supported.


Implementation notes
--------------------

The flatbuffers java source files are generated by running the flatc
compiler from [Google Flatbuffers](https://github.com/google/flatbuffers)
version 1.11.0 on the Arrow version of
[feather.fbs](https://github.com/apache/arrow/blob/master/cpp/src/arrow/ipc/feather.fbs).
I subsequently moved the generated source files into a different
java package to avoid possible namespace clashes with external code
that may use a different version of flatbuffers.


Usage
-----

Comprehensive documentation is provided in the
[javadocs](https://mbtaylor.github.io/jarrow/javadocs/).

The classes in the package uk.ac.bristol.star.feather form the
usable parts of the I/O library.  The classes in the
uk.ac.bristol.star.fbs.* packages are flatbuffer support files
that you shouldn't need to use.
To read a table, you can use `FeatherTable.fromFile(File)` method;
examples in `FeatherTable.main`.

To write a table, use `FeatherWriter.write(OutputStream)`;
this requires you to implement some `FeatherColumnWriter` objects
in some way appropriate to the data structures in which your table
data resides; there are examples in `FeatherWriter.main`.


Support and future development
------------------------------

I don't know whether anybody else will want to use this package.
If you do, and if you are interested in features that are not
currently present, please contact me (@mbtaylor).


Licence
-------

Available under the LGPL.  If that's not good for you I can probably
add another licence.

History
-------

* **Version 1.0 (27 Feb 2020)**: Initial release
